Journal of Biogeography, 26, 867–878



                                       The distance decay of similarity in biogeography
                                       and ecology
                                       Jeffrey C. Nekola∗ and Peter S. White Curriculum in Ecology, University of North Carolina
                                       at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, U.S.A.



                                       Abstract
                                       Aim Our aim was to understand how similarity changes with distance in biological
                                       communities, to use the distance decay perspective as quantitative technique to describe
                                       biogeographic pattern, and to explore whether growth form, dispersal type, rarity, or
                                       support affected the rate of distance decay in similarity.
                                       Location North American spruce-fir forests, Appalachian montane spruce-fir forests.
                                       Methods We estimated rates of distance decay through regression of log-transformed
                                       compositional similarity against distance for pairwise comparisons of thirty-four white
                                       spruce plots and twenty-six black spruce plots distributed from eastern Canada to Alaska,
                                       six regional floras along the crest of the Appalachians, and six regional floras along the
                                       east–west extent of the boreal forest.
                                       Results Similarity decreased significantly with distance, with the most linear models relating
                                       the log of similarity to untransformed distance. The rate of similarity decay was 1.5–1.9
                                       times higher for vascular plants than for bryophytes. The rate of distance decay was highest
                                       for berry-fruited and nut-bearing species (1.7 times higher than plumose-seeded species and
                                       1.9 times higher than microseeded/spore species) and 2.1 times higher for herbs than woody
                                       plants. There was no distance decay for rare species, while species of intermediate frequency
                                       had 2.0 times higher distance decay rates than common species. The rate of distance decay
                                       was 2.7 times higher for floras from the fragmented Appalachians than for floras from the
                                       contiguous boreal forest.
                                       Main conclusions The distance decay of similarity can be caused by either a decrease in
                                       environmental similarity with distance (e.g. climatic gradients) or by limits to dispersal and
                                       niche width differences among taxa. Regardless of cause, the distance decay of similarity
                                       provides a simple descriptor of how biological diversity is distributed and therefore has
                                       consequences for conservation strategy.

                                       Keywords
                                       Similarity, spatial dependence, distance decay, biological diversity, boreal forest.




INTRODUCTION                                                            analyses of spatial autocorrelation and eventually to the field
                                                                        of geostatistics, a field that has grown tremendously in the last
The similarity between two observations often decreases or
                                                                        decade (Cressie, 1993).
decays as the distance between them increases, a pattern long
                                                                           While ecologists and biogeographers have rarely referred to
recognized in the geographical literature and once called ‘the
                                                                        distance decay per se, a negative relationship between distance
first law of geography’ (Tobler, 1970). That early interest in
                                                                        and similarity is implicit in several ecological and evolutionary
the distance decay of similarity led subsequently to formal
                                                                        phenomena. For example, species turnover along spatial
                                                                        environmental gradients produces a decrease of similarity with
  ∗ Present address: Department of Natural and Applied Science,         distance (e.g. Whittaker, 1975; Cody, 1985). Mass effect (Shmida
University of Wisconsin-Green Bay, Green Bay, Wisconsin 52311, U.S.A.   & Ellner, 1984), source-sink dynamics in metapopulations
email: nekolaj@uwgb.edu
  Corresponding author: Peter S. White, Department of Biology,
                                                                        (Hanski & Gilpin, 1991), and supply side ecology
CB#3280, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill,      (Roughgarden, Gaines & Pacala, 1987) have stressed the
North Carolina 27599, U.S.A. email: pswhite@unc.edu                     importance of dispersal and therefore distance in explanations

 1999
868 J. C. Nekola and P. S. White



of population dynamics and community composition (Palmer,               DISTANCE DECAY OF BIOLOGICAL
1988). Studies in island biogeography have found a decrease             SIMILARITY: CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
in percent species saturation of oceanic or habitat islands as a
function of their distance from a source pool of immigrants             Distance decay and geostatistics
(Vuilleumier, 1970; Kadmon & Pulliam, 1993), producing a
                                                                        Our approach to the distance decay of similarity is parallel to,
decrease in the similarity of species lists with distance. Dispersal,
                                                                        but methodologically different from, geostatistical approaches
migration, and gene flow produce geographic patterns in the
                                                                        to the analysis of spatial autocorrelation (Cressie, 1993). It is
distribution of genetic variation and in the distribution of
                                                                        now standard practice to use semi-variograms to characterize
species that result from vicariance and adaptive radiations
                                                                        the relationship of variance of a parameter to intersample
(Meyers & Giller, 1988; Briggs, 1991), leading to spatially
                                                                        distance or lag (Ripley, 1988), a critical step in the optimal
autocorrelated distributional patterns that were described in
                                                                        interpolation technique called kriging (Burrough, 1986; Webster
the early biogeographic literature under the age and area and
                                                                        & Oliver, 1990). To construct a semi-variogram, variance is
centre of origin hypotheses (Cain, 1944; Willis, 1922).
                                                                        calculated by comparing values of the parameter at two
   These examples suggest two very different causes of
                                                                        locations of known distance apart. The statistic we model here,
biological distance decay. On the one hand, a decay of similarity
                                                                        similarity, is a parallel concept to variance in the sense that it
results from a simple decrease in environmental similarity
                                                                        results from comparison of two observations from different
with distance (e.g. movement along a topographic or climatic
                                                                        locations. In our case the observations consist of species lists;
gradient). In this case, the underlying explanation is competitive
                                                                        similarity is a complex function of the occurrence of many
sorting of species with different physiological abilities;
                                                                        species (Faith, Minchin & Belbin, 1987). By contrast, variance
composition, at least after sufficient time has elapsed, is
                                                                        is calculated for univariate factors (e.g. soil pH, rainfall, or
predictable from environment. We term this source of biological
                                                                        abundance of a single species).
distance decay the niche difference model.
                                                                           Variance and similarity both measure differences between
   The second cause of distance decay is that the spatial
                                                                        samples and can be modelled as a function of intersample
configuration (the size and isolation of habitats), spatial context
                                                                        distance. In this paper, we use linear regression to model that
(the nature of the matrix surrounding the habitats), and time
                                                                        relationship. The intercept of this model is similar to the nugget
influence species and gene movement across landscapes.
                                                                        effect (residual intersample variance as distance decreases to
Variation in distance decay rates among landscapes occurs in
                                                                        zero) in semi-variograms. The shape of the similarity-distance
this case because different landscapes have different resistances
                                                                        relationship can be examined for evidence of a range and sill
to the movement of organisms. Variation in distance decay
                                                                        which, in semi-variograms are, respectively, the distance at
rates among different species groups will also arise if the groups
                                                                        which variance becomes independent of further increases in
have different dispersal abilities—in essence, different species
                                                                        distance and the amount of variance at that distance. Regression
will perceive a given spatial configuration of habitats differently.
                                                                        of similarity against distance has the advantage in our case of
Variation in landscape resistance to movement and in dispersal
                                                                        producing a direct estimate of the rate of distance decay and
abilities suggest an interaction between the spatial template
                                                                        thus the rate of composition change through space. One of our
and time: the greater the resistance to movement or the less
                                                                        purposes is to ask whether species with different dispersal types
vagile the organism, the greater the amount of time required
                                                                        or growth forms show different rates of compositional change.
for the organism to cross a given spatial template. As a result,
the nature of the spatial configuration of habitats will affect
how long the effects of historic events persists in terms of            Scale dependence and distance decay
distributional patterns of species. When time or dispersal are
limiting, current environmental conditions will not fully explain       Grain, extent and related geostatistical concepts
species distributions or local composition. We term this source         Observations of distance decay will show scale dependence.
of distance decay the model of temporal and spatial constraint:         Ecologists have divided scale into grain and extent (Allen &
history and the nature of the spatial template explain species          Hoekstra, 1991; Weins, 1989). Grain, which is similar to the
distributions. At large scales of space and time, the imprint of        concept of support or resolution in the geostatistical literature
past events has been termed historic biogeography (Schluter &           (Odland, 1988; Webster & Oliver, 1990; Cressie, 1993), is the
Ricklefs, 1993).                                                        contiguous area over which a single observation is made (e.g.
   In this paper we explore distance decay as a descriptor of           quadrat, plot, or pixel). In this sense it is a special case of
compositional variation. We first discuss scale dependence in           support, which is defined as an n-dimensional volume within
the detection of distance decay and develop a conceptual                which a linear averaged value of a regionalized value may
framework for distance decay. We then examine distance decay            be computed (Olea, 1991). Spatial extent, called area in the
rates in boreal and montane spruce-fir forests, comparing the           geostatistical literature (Cressie, 1993), is the space over which
rate of similarity decay in several species groups (vascular            observations are made.
plants, mosses, species abundance classes, growth form classes,           The grain size or support of samples will effect observed
and dispersal classes) across the same set of plots. Finally,           similarities, a phenomenon known as the support effect in
we discuss the implications of distance decay perspective for           the geostatistical literature. Consider two areas with identical
community composition, biogeographical pattern, and                     species lists. If a small quadrat is sampled from each area,
conservation.                                                           species-area relationships dictate that these quadrats will have

                                                                                                         Blackwell Science Ltd 199926867–878
                                                                                                           Distance decay of similarity 869



only a subset of the possible species and will contain identical
species lists only a portion of the time. If we increase grain
size, however, species lists will become more complete until,
at a grain size that is equivalent to the size of the study areas,
all possible species will be contained and the observed similarity
will equal the real similarity. If two regions have a similarity
greater than zero, small samples, by chance, can have either
higher or lower similarity than the real similarity. The
distribution of sample scores will vary with the distribution of
individuals among species, the spatial pattern of species and
individuals, the sampling design, and that component of the
species-area relationship that we term the species-grain
relationship (Palmer & White, 1994). In general, we expect
that the variation in observed similarities among samples will
increase as grain size decreases, assuming that the real similarity
is a positive value. This effect of change in support or grain size
on sample statistics has been well discussed in the geographical
literature as the modifiable areal unit problem (Openshaw,
1983). It has generally been found that variation increases as
support or grain size decreases.
   Although distance decay proposes that similarity decreases
with extent, natural periodicities in the environment may cause
a lack of distance decay at some scales of observation (Fig. 1).
Geostatisticians have treated similar patterns of variance as
the problem of non-stationarity (Webster & Oliver, 1990). For
example, if extent is only large enough to include a mountain
crest and its adjacent valley, distance decay will likely occur
as a result of the strong environmental gradient that is present.
However, if extent is increased to include the next mountain
crest, similarity of community composition will likely increase
in relation to the first mountain summit. If extent is increased
further still to include a large number of mountain crests and
                                                                      Figure 1 The influence of sample grain and extent on the
valleys, distance decay will likely re-emerge from either climatic
                                                                      observation of distance decay. A, A hypothetical landscape with
gradients or the presence of dispersal barriers between places        spatial periodicities in similarity controlled by strong environmental
with similar environments.                                            gradients (elevation contours); B, the distance decay of similarity as
   The detection of distance decay requires that the variation        detected by samples of differing grain and extent.
due to small grain size or support be less than the variation
due to spatial extent. Increasing the grain size or support of a      the spatial template) and two characteristics of the organisms
sample will decrease variation, and may allow detection of            under study (niche-breadth and dispersal ability). The effects
weak distance decay trends. Alternatively, increasing extent          of each of these factors are discussed below.
while holding sample grain or support constant may allow
identification of distance decay trends because the variation         Environmental distance
due to distance will be larger than the noise present from small      For a fixed spatial distance, the steeper the rate of environmental
grain size or support. The strongest distance decay relationships     change, the more rapid the turnover in species composition
should be observed when the variation due to sampling error           and the higher the expected rate of distance decay. Ecologists
is minimized (with large sample grains or support) and the            often have assumed that composition is solely a function of
variation due to distance decay is maximized (with large sample       environment (e.g. MacArthur, 1972; Tilman, 1988). For the
extents).                                                             rate of distance decay to be solely controlled by environmental
                                                                      distance, all species must have access to all appropriate habitats
A conceptual model for variation in distance decay                    and time must be sufficient to allow competitive interactions
rates                                                                 to sort species as a function of environment. In essence, this
                                                                      summarizes Beijerinck’s Law: everything is everywhere but the
The rate of distance decay will vary with the strength of             environment selects (Saur, 1988). Niche characteristics and
environmental gradients and will differ among taxa and                competition determine composition.
between landscapes of different spatial configurations and
histories. More formally, we suggest that the rate of decay in        The spatial template
biological similarity will be correlated with two characteristics     Characteristics of the spatial template (habitat size, isolation,
of the environment (environmental distance and the nature of          and the nature of the matrix) will effect the rate of distance

 Blackwell Science Ltd 199926867–878
870 J. C. Nekola and P. S. White



decay, all else being equal. The more isolated the habitat, the          The second data set consisted of regional vascular plant lists
less efficient dispersal will be. Some species will not locate all    for the boreal forest and Appalachian montane spruce-fir. While
available habitats (Huffaker, 1958; Shmida & Ellner, 1984),           the boreal forest exists in a relatively continuous band from
leading to lower levels of species overlap among sites and            Alaska to Newfoundland, montane spruce-fir is restricted to
higher rates of distance decay. Factors which would effect            the highest peaks, with the areas dominated by spruce and fir
distance decay rates are: the unfavourability of the matrix           separated from one another as a series of island-like clusters
(which would affect rates of movement), the favourability of          (Cogbill & White, 1991). Species lists for six boreal and six
the habitat patches (which would affect size, reproduction, and       Appalachian spruce-fir forest regions were compiled from the
persistence of the populations), and the presence of corridors        literature and corrected to a common nomenclatural base
or stepping stone connections. In a sense, these measure the          (Crandall, 1958; Curtis, 1959; Grigal, 1968; Lakela, 1965; LaRoi,
resistant to movement of the landscape. The percolation               1967; Maycock, 1961; Maycock & Curtis, 1960; McIntosh &
coefficient is an example of a measure of the affect of spatial       Hurley, 1964; Nicholson, Holway & Scott, 1969; Ohmann &
characteristics on movement. This coefficient represents the          Ream, 1971; Oosting & Billings, 1951; Ramseur, 1960; Siccama,
permeability of a given landscape to unidirectional organism          1974; White, 1982; White & Miller, 1988). Similarity was
movement (Gardner et al., 1989).                                      calculated between all pairwise comparisons of these regions
                                                                      within both groups. This data set has a larger support (each
Niche breadth and overlap                                             list is a regional flora) than the one from LaRoi (1967).
The wider the average niche breadth and overlap for a group              We addressed several questions using these data sets: Does
of organisms, the lower the rate of distance decay which will         community similarity decrease with distance and, if so, what
occur over a fixed amount of environmental distance. Realized         statistical model best describes this relationship? Do isolated
niche breadth and overlap may decrease over successional              habitats (Appalachian mountain summits and slopes) have a
time as species sort along gradients (Werner & Platt, 1976;           higher rate of distance decay than more contiguous ones (boreal
Christensen & Peet, 1984).                                            forest)? Do data sets with larger grain size or support (the
                                                                      regional floristic lists), because they have more complete species
Dispersal ability                                                     lists, have higher overall similarities and lower distance decay
Highly vagile species will be less affected by barriers and will      rates than data sets with smaller grain size or support (boreal
be able to locate most or all of the appropriate habitats in a        forest plot data)? Do wind-dispersed species (bryophytes and
landscape (Bush & Whittaker, 1991; Dzwonko & Loster, 1992)            wind-dispersed vascular plants) have higher rates of distance
and such dispersal may compensate for low persistence rates           decay than less vagile species? Do taller and dominant species
(e.g. as suggested by the source-sink population model and the        (which may have broader environmental tolerances) have lower
rescue effect, Brown & Kodric-Brown, 1977). More vagile taxa          distance decay rates than smaller and understory species?
should therefore show lower rates of distance decay over a               We addressed the questions about dispersal, dominance, and
given landscape. Species with poorer vagilities will be unable        frequency by using data from a single set of plots, thus holding
to cross barriers, leading to their absence from potential sites      spatial configuration and environmental distance constant for
(Weddell, 1991), contributing to higher distance decay rates.         all groups compared. The distance decay rates for bryophytes
                                                                      and vascular plants were compared with data from both white
                                                                      spruce and black spruce plots. Comparisons among vascular
DISTANCE DECAY IN SPRUCE-FIR FORESTS
                                                                      plant classes were made with data from white spruce plots only.
The boreal and montane spruce-fir forests of eastern and              The following paragraphs describe the questions addressed with
northern North America have similar structures over large             white spruce plots in more detail.
areas (Cogbill & White, 1991). Two data sets were constructed
from published studies of these forests. In the first, the vascular
plants and bryophytes of the North American boreal forests            The contribution of species in different frequency classes to
were analysed from data in LaRoi (1967) and LaRoi & Stringer          distance decay rate
(1976). These papers present species lists for nine hectare plots     Species were divided into three classes: species found on one
(300×300 m) distributed from Newfoundland to Alaska in two            to three plots (139 species), four to fourteen plots (eighty-four
community types: upland white spruce forests (thirty-four plots       species), and fifteen to thirty-four plots (twenty-nine species).
containing 252 vascular plant species and 118 bryophyte species)      We also summed the last two classes to produce a fourth class,
and lowland black spruce forests (twenty-six plots containing         those species found on four to thirty-four plots (113 species).
195 vascular plant species and seventy-nine bryophyte species).       Common species are shared by many plots and therefore
Similarity and distances were calculated for all pairwise             decrease the overall rate of distance decay (in the extreme, for
combinations of plots within these two habitat types (a total         species found in all plots, intersample similarity is always 1.0
of 561 values for white spruce stands and 351 for black spruce        and is independent of distance). Species found in only one plot
stands). These data sets were chosen because they allow us to         would lower the similarity between any two plots but would
examine distance decay for relatively homogeneous forests             not contribute to a spatial trend in similarity at this scale
(each of the habitats is dominated by the same tree species           (similarity based on these species would be zero at all distances).
throughout) in relatively unbroken topography across a large          We therefore hypothesized that species with intermediate
geographic extent.                                                    frequency would show the steepest rate of distance decay.

                                                                                                        Blackwell Science Ltd 199926867–878
                                                                                                           Distance decay of similarity 871



Variation in distance decay rate among growth forms                    were assembled (we used non-zero values because we were
Casual observation suggested that trees in the boreal forest           interested in the slope of the distance decay relationship over
have wider geographic distributions than plants with other             those distances that have a measured similarity—presumably
growth forms. This suggests wider environmental tolerances             similarity falls to zero at some distance and then is
and a lower distance decay rate. We therefore investigated             independent of distance thereafter); (2) after testing the
whether there were systematic differences in distance decay            difference in mean similarity for the two data subsets,
rates for plants with different growth forms. Species were             similarity values within each subset were rescaled to a
divided into five classes: trees (nineteen species), tall shrubs       common mean (we sought to test the difference in slopes
(twenty-two species), low shrubs (thirty-five species), subshrubs      of the distance decay relationships independent of differences
(sixteen species), and herbs (160 species). We also compared           in the means); (3) for each pair of sites, the two similarity
the bryophyte data to the data from these vascular plant growth        values (one for each of the two data subsets to be compared)
form classes.                                                          were randomly reassigned to the two data subsets; (4) after
                                                                       this randomization had been carried out for all pairs of
Variation in distance decay rate among dispersal classes               sites, linear regression was used to determine the slope of
More vagile species should have lower distance decay rates             the distance decay relationship for each of the randomized
than less vagile species. Species were divided into three major        subsets; (5) step four was repeated to produce
and five total dispersal classes: wind dispersed species (a total      10,000 values for the slope of the distance decay relationship
of sixty-three species, comprised of two subcategories, twenty-        for randomized subsets; (6) finally, the absolute difference
eight spore/microseed species and thirty-five plumose seed             between the slopes in each of the 10,000 randomizations
species), berry-fruited/nut-bearing species (sixty-four species),      was compared to the difference between the observed slopes
and species with other dispersal types (125 species). We also          based on the original data (and thus the true assignments
compared the bryophyte data to the data from these vascular            to data subset categories) and we calculated how many times
plant dispersal classes.                                               (out of 10,000 trials) randomization produced a difference
                                                                       in slope between the subsets that was at least as great as
                                                                       the observed difference in slope based on the original data.
Similarity index                                                       If correct assignment to data categories is significant (if the
We used Jaccard’s Index (Mueller-Dombois & Ellenberg, 1974)            categories are indeed different in slope), then the observed
due to its simplicity, its widespread use, its accessibility through   difference should exceed the randomized differences a high
common statistical packages, and its use of presence/absence           percentage of the time. We used this percentage as the P
data. We chose a presence-absence metric because it represents         value for our tests.
a more conservative measure of community similarity than
ones based on species abundance data which are more sensitive
to disturbance and local environmental differences.
                                                                       RESULTS

Data analysis
                                                                       Distance decay in spruce-fir forests
For the largest empirical data sets (white spruce and black
spruce stands of the boreal forest), similarity and distance were      In all data sets except for rare species in white spruce stands,
calculated and then log-transformed. Linear regression was             similarity decreased significantly with distance (Figs 2–6, Table
used to calculate distance decay rates or all four combinations        1). The most linear relationship and the most heteroscedastic
of these transformed and untransformed variables. Inspection           regression residuals were found in models that used the log
of the plots and regression residuals were used to determine           transformation of similarity and untransformed distance. A
which formulation most closely approximated a linear                   semi-log model was thus used in all of the regression models
relationship over most intersample distances.                          presented here. This implies an exponential rate of distance
   Because the values in the matrices (561 for white spruce            decay. For the boreal forest plot data, the rate of similarity
stands, 351 for black spruce stands) are not independent,              decay ranged from −0.17 (black spruce bryophytes; units are
randomization tests were used to establish the significance of         in ln (similarity) per 1000 km of distance) to −0.55 (white
regression models and to make comparisons of distance decay            spruce vascular plants of intermediate frequency) and r2 values
rates among various subsets of the data. Mantel tests with             ranged from 0.24 (black spruce bryophytes) to 0.71 (common
10,000 replications (Jackson & Somer, 1989) were used to               vascular plants on white spruce plots). For the regional floras,
estimate significance of each model (Manly, 1991).                     the rate of similarity decay ranged −0.25 (boreal forest, r2=
   The comparison of distance decay rates among various                0.54) and −0.67 (Appalachian montane forest, r2=0.80). All
subsets of the data was done with a randomization test                 of these relationships are fit well by a straight line in log-linear
developed by Blake Weiler of the Ecology Curriculum at the             space (Figs 2–6), with no obvious sill (i.e. no distance at which
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Our objective             the data imply a change of slope for the regression). Our closest
was to compare the slopes of the distance decay relationship           observations are not close enough for a detailed analysis of
between two data subjects (e.g. trees v. herbs) across all             the intercept value for the regressions, which is analogous to
plots. The method followed this outline: (1) all non-zero              the nugget effect in semi-variograms, although we make a few
similarities based on the two data subsets to be compared              comments on that parameter below.

 Blackwell Science Ltd 199926867–878
872 J. C. Nekola and P. S. White




                                                                                          Figure 2 The log of similarity plotted
                                                                                          against distance for all pairwise comparisons
                                                                                          of plots sampled across the boreal forest
                                                                                          based on data in LaRoi (1967) and LaRoi &
                                                                                          Stringer (1976). A, Vascular plants in thrity-
                                                                                          four white spruce stands; B, bryophytes in
                                                                                          thirty-four white spruce stands; C, vascular
                                                                                          plants in twenty-six black spruce stands; D,
                                                                                          bryophytes in twenty-six black spruce stands.




                                                                                          Figure 3 The log of similarity plotted
                                                                                          against distance for species frequency classes
                                                                                          (white spruce stands only; data from LaRoi,
                                                                                          1967). A, Vascular plants found in four or
                                                                                          more plots; B, vascular plants found in fifteen
                                                                                          to thirty-four plots; C, vascular plants found
                                                                                          in four to fourteen plots; D, vascular plants
                                                                                          found in three or fewer plots.


The effect of frequency, growth form, dispersal type,               distance decay rates for regional floras (Fig. 6) with those for
and habitat isolation on distance decay rates                       plot data (Fig. 2). Both include data taken over the geographic
                                                                    extent of boreal forest, but the floristic lists include rare species
Species frequency                                                   that are at their range limits at each location, whereas the plots
When rare species (those occurring in three or less of the 34       are less likely to sample species that are very rare in the
white spruce plots) were eliminated from the data set, the rate     landscape as a whole. The fuller regional species lists (and
of distance decay was unaffected (Fig. 3A; Table 1), but            larger support) of the floristic data set lowers the observed rate
similarities were generally higher, the intercept was closer to     of similarity loss per unit distance. In a sense, the larger support
unity (complete similarity at a distance of 0), and the r2 value    reduces the observed rarity of species. Thus, the rate of distance
was higher. Thus, rare species lower overall similarity but do      decay for boreal forest plot data was 1.5 times higher than
not affect the rate of distance decay. As might be expected         that for boreal forest floristic lists across the same geographical
from this analysis, the rare species themselves showed no decay     extent (Table 1).
of similarity as a function of distance (Fig. 3B).
   The species occurring in four or more plots were divided         Growth form
into two groups: common species (fifteen or more plots) and         In the white spruce plots, herbs had 1.7–2.1 times higher
intermediate species (four to fourteen plots). The common           distance decay rate than woody plant classes (P < 0.005–0.0001;
species had a higher intercept value than intermediate species      Tables 1 and 2, Fig. 4). The higher distance decay rate for the
and a rate of distance decay (−0.27) that was only one half         smallest vascular plants was reversed for the contrast between
as great as the rate for intermediate species (−0.55) (Fig. 3C–D;   vascular plants and bryophytes: herbs had 1.6 times the rates
Table 1).                                                           for bryophytes in the same plots (Fig. 2, Table 1). Interestingly,
   The influence of rare species can also be seen by comparing      bryophytes had similar rates of distance decay to tall woody

                                                                                                       Blackwell Science Ltd 199926867–878
                                                                                                    Distance decay of similarity 873




Figure 4 The log of similarity plotted
against distance for growth form classes
(white spruce stands only; data from LaRoi,
1967). A, Trees; B, tall shrubs; C, low shrubs;
D, subshrubs; E, herbs.




Figure 5 The log of similarity plotted
against distance for dispersal classes (white
spruce stands only; data from LaRoi, 1967).
A, Wind-dispersed species; B, species with
plumose seeds; C, species with spores or
microscopic seeds; D, species with nuts or
fleshy berries; E, species with other types of
seeds.



plants on the same plots; they also had similar rates to wind-     Dispersal type
dispersed vascular plants (see below). Vascular plants as a        For vascular plants on white spruce plots, berry-fruited and
group had 1.5 (white spruce plots) and 1.9 (black spruce plots)    nut-bearing species had nearly twice the rate of distance decay
times higher distance decay rates than bryophytes of the same      shown by spore/microseed and plumose seed species (−0.43 v.
plots (comparisons significant at the P < 0.001 level; Table 1).   −0.23 and −0.25, P < 0.001; Tables 1 and 2, Fig. 5B, C, and

 Blackwell Science Ltd 199926867–878
874 J. C. Nekola and P. S. White




                                                                                              Figure 6 The log of similarity plotted
                                                                                              against distance for all pairwise comparisons
                                                                                              of vascular plant floras from six regions
                                                                                              across the northern boreal forest [data
                                                                                              modified from Curtis (1959), Grigal (1968),
                                                                                              Lakela (1965), LaRoi (1967), Maycock (1961),
                                                                                              Maycock & Curtis (1960) and Ohmann &
                                                                                              Ream (1971)] and six areas along the crest of
                                                                                              the Appalachian mountains [data modified
                                                                                              from Crandall (1958), LaRoi (1967),
                                                                                              McIntosh & Hurley (1964), Nicholson,
                                                                                              Holway & Scott (1969), Oosting & Billings
                                                                                              (1951), Ramseur (1960), White (1982)]. A,
                                                                                              Boreal spruce-fir forests; B, Appalachian
                                                                                              spruce-fir forests.




                                                                                              Table 1 Regression statistics for the decay of
Data set                                 Species   n     Intercept   Slope     r2      P      similarity with distance in spruce-fir data sets.
                                                                                              The sample size (n) is the number of
White spruce vascular plants              252      561    −0.75      −0.37    0.67   0.0001   similarity values and distances in each matrix.
White spruce bryophytes                   118      561    −0.87      −0.25    0.53   0.0001   The number of plots or areas are as follows:
Black spruce vascular plants              195      351    −0.88      −0.33    0.57   0.0001   white spruce plots, 34; black spruce plots, 26;
Black spruce bryophytes                    70      351    −0.98      −0.17    0.24   0.0001   boreal spruce-fir areas, 6; Appalachian
Data subsets (white spruce plots only)                                                        montane spruce-fir areas, 6. For the three
Frequency class:                                                                              data subsets of the white spruce plots, the
   4–34 plots                             113      561    −0.57      −0.37    0.71   0.0001   sample size is sometimes lower than 561
  15–34 plots                              29      561    −0.24      −0.27    0.59   0.0001   because of the removal of plot pairs with a
   4–14 plots                              84      467    −1.04      −0.55    0.66   0.0001   similarity of zero. Intercepts are in units of
   1–3 plots                              139       63    −2.40      −0.006   0.00     n.s.   ln(similarity). Slope values are in units of
Growth form:                                                                                  ln(similarity) per 1000 km distance.
  Trees                                    19      555    −0.51      −0.19    0.30   0.0001
  Tall shrubs                              22      271    −1.21      −0.20    0.17   0.0001
  Low shrubs                               35      472    −1.09      −0.21    0.20   0.0001
  Subshrubs                                16      528    −0.66      −0.28    0.45   0.0001
  Herbs                                   160      554    −0.84      −0.40    0.52   0.0001
Dispersal class:
  Wind                                     63      485    −1.14      −0.29    0.38   0.0001
  Plumose                                  35      329    −1.09      −0.25    0.31   0.0001
  Spore/microscopic                        28      408    −1.02      −0.23    0.28   0.0001
  Fleshy fruits, nuts                      64      532    −0.62      −0.43    0.62   0.0001
  Other                                   125      561    −0.84      −0.27    0.48   0.0001
Boreal forest regions                     250       15    −0.76      −0.25    0.54   0.0039
Appalachian spruce-fir                    226       15    −0.18      −0.67    0.80   0.0018



                                                                                                           Blackwell Science Ltd 199926867–878
                                                                                                                Distance decay of similarity 875



Table 2 Significance levels for differences in
slopes for the growth form and dispersal         A. Growth form
classes.                                                                           Tall shrubs    Low shrubs        Subshrubs         Herbs

                                                   Trees                              0.05            0.05            0.0001         0.0001
                                                   Tall shrubs                                       (0.18)           0.01           0.005
                                                   Low shrubs                                                         0.005          0.0001
                                                   Subshrubs                                                                         0.0001

                                                 B. Dispersal class
                                                                                    Plumose      Spore/micro.         Fleshy          Other

                                                   Wind                             (0.0649)        0.0001            0.0001         0.004
                                                   Plumose                                          (0.645)           0.0001         (0.79)
                                                   Spore/microseeded species                                          0.0001         (0.306)
                                                   Fleshy fruited, nut-bearing                                                       0.0001
                                                     species



E). Berry-fruited and nut-bearing species had the highest r2               change in similarity per unit distance. This is attractive because
values among the dispersal types (Table 1). These data suggest             it suggests that the processes underlying the distance decay
that wind-dispersed species are both more widely dispersed                 relationship vary only with environmental distance, spatial
and more variable in their occurrences. Bryophytes had similar             configuration, and organism attributes but not with distance
distance decay rates to spore/microseeded and plumose seeded               independent of these factors. Hubbell (1995) has produced a
vascular plants on the same plots (Table 1).                               simulation model of species colonization and extinction that
                                                                           results in just such a decrease in similarity with distance.
Habitat isolation
Appalachian forest communities had a rate of similarity decay
                                                                           Variation in distance decay rates
2.7 times that observed for the continuous northern boreal
forest (Fig. 6, Table 1).                                                  The rate of distance decay varied among species groups in
                                                                           expected ways: on the same plots, spore/microseeded and
                                                                           plumose species had lower rates of distance decay than larger
DISCUSSION
                                                                           fruited species. Trees, other woody plants, wind dispersed, and
                                                                           more frequent species raised overall similarity and lowered the
Form of the distance decay model
                                                                           rate of distance decay, while herbaceous plants, heavy fruited,
In the geographic literature, a distance effect on the interaction         and less frequent species lowered the rate. Further, the more
between human populations has been modelled with a power                   fragmented montane forests dominated by the same genera of
or gravity function (Bennett & Gade, 1979):                                trees as the boreal forest had much higher rates of distance
                                                                           decay than the more contiguous boreal forest itself. We will
                               I=A∗d−c
                                                                           consider alternative explanations for these patterns.
where I is interaction, A is a constant, d is distance, and c                 While it can be suggested that due to their small propagule
is the friction coefficient (correlated with technologies for              size bryophytes should be more vagile and possess wider ranges
communication and barriers to movement over a given                        along geographic gradients than vascular plant species (Saur,
distance). This model implies an ever decreasing effect of a               1988), other explanations are reasonable. The smaller size of
unit distance as distance becomes larger and a linear relationship         bryophytes compared to vascular plants may allow persistence
only under double log transformation.                                      in microsites not available to vascular plants, thus increasing
   The finding that a semi-log model showed the most linear                geographic range. Bryophytes may have broader physiological
relationships suggests similarity could in fact be related to              tolerances and higher persistence rates because they can cycle
distance through an exponential model:                                     rapidly between active and dormant states.
                                                                              In light of these possibilities, it is interesting to note that
                               S=S0e−cd
                                                                           herbs, which are the smallest vascular plants (thus sharing,
where S is similarity at distance d; S0 is initial similarity or           with bryophytes, environments that have less fluctuating air
similarity at distance 0; c is a constant for the rate of distance         temperatures), showed the highest rates of similarity loss with
decay; and d is distance. Exponential decay models have                    distance of all groups. By contrast, wind-dispersed vascular
previously been used in biogeography and ecology to model                  plants had very similar rates of distance decay to bryophytes
plant dispersal (Okubo & Levin, 1989) and to describe the                  on these plots regardless of plant stature. Tall vascular plants
relationship between spatial distance and floristic similarity in          had as low or lower distance decay rates than bryophytes.
the Galapagos (Preston, 1962). The exponential model, in                      In terms of the comparison of wind and non-wind dispersed
contrast to the power model, implies a constant proportional               species, dispersal type could be correlated with other traits that

 Blackwell Science Ltd 199926867–878
876 J. C. Nekola and P. S. White



influence the rate of geographic turnover. For example, wind-            Regardless of whether we can evaluate causes, the decay of
dispersed species could have wider niche breadth (as has been         similarity with distance is a relatively simple descriptor of
argued for early successional species generally), thus showing        variation in species composition and has consequences for
a lower rate of distance decay. On the other hand, wind-              how we conserve biological diversity. Whether because of
dispersed species often have small seeds and may therefore            environmental distance decay or spatial and historical factors,
have a lower probability of establishment from a given dispersal      the distance decay paradigm suggests a natural world that is,
event, particularly in undisturbed forest studies here (i.e. the      at some scales, everywhere unique. Distance decay rates describe
probability of establishment in late successional stands could        the rate of turnover that underlies this uniqueness.
be correlated with seed size). It is unclear how this would              Simberloff & Abele (1970) argued that the theory of island
influence distance decay; a simple expectation is that it would       biogeography was silent on preserve design; that is, this theory
tend to make similarity more variable at any distance.                could not be used to argue whether one large area would have
   The higher rate of distance decay in the Appalachian montane       more species than several smaller areas that summed to the
spruce-fir forests could be due to less efficient dispersal among     same total area. They suggested that the critical factor was the
fragmented habitats, but it could also be the result of history       degree of overlap (i.e. the similarity) among the smaller areas.
(the southern and northern Appalachian spruce-fir forest may          Shafer (1990) showed that whether one area or several small
have had access to different refugial populations after climatic      areas of the same total area had more species or not was
warming started 15,000 years BP) and/or steeper rate of               dependent on two factors: the slope of the log(species)-log(area)
environmental change with distance. In terms of environmental         relationship and the similarity among the smaller areas. We
distance, montane spruce-fir forests have very similar growing        add here that if the smaller areas (which are by definition
season temperatures across the wide range of latitudes covered        non-contiguous and thus spatially dispersed compared to one
in the data set (a mean July temperature of 17°C is correlated        contiguous area) are more different from one another as a
with their lower elevational boundaries), but are exposed to          function of the distance between them (see also Palmer &
increasingly low winter temperatures northward (Cogbill &             White, 1994), then the decay of similarity with distance is a
White, 1991).                                                         central explanation of why some investigators (e.g. Stohlgren
   Sorting out the relative importance of environment and             & Quinn, 1991) find that smaller dispersed conservation areas
niche-based explanations from spatial configuration and               collectively have more species than large conservation areas.
dispersal-based ones is a difficult challenge. Explanations of        In essence, conservation strategy requires both grain size for
species composition based on environmental factors and                population persistence (Shoenwald-Cox, 1983; Newmark, 1987)
competition are old ones in ecology. However, explanations            and spatial extent (for capturing areas dissimilar to one
based on history and dispersal have also been proposed from           another). The SLOSS (single large or several small) debate can
the beginning. Gleason (1923) suggested that in the Midwest           never be resolved because size (grain) and subdivision (extent)
passive dispersal of propagules was the major factor explaining       maximize different aspects of how biological diversity is
community composition. Palmgren (1926) found that many                distributed. The distance decay of similarity, in this sense,
plant species of the Åland Archipelago, Finland, were absent         provides a metric and a conceptual base for such efforts as
from seemingly suitable sites, and suggested that dispersal           GAP analysis that seek to identify habitats and species left out
limitation was responsible for this pattern.                          of existing conservation areas (Davis et al., 1990).
   When species do not disperse to all appropriate sites,
composition will be constrained by the spatial configuration
of sites and dispersal abilities of species. At one extreme (if all   REFERENCES
species had the same dispersal abilities), community
composition would be a stochastic subset of the species which         Allen, T.F.H. & Hoekstra, T.W. (1991) Role of heterogeneity in scaling
can occupy that habitat. Shmida & Ellner (1984) and Shmida              of ecological systems under analysis. Ecological heterogeneity (ed.
                                                                        by J. Kolasa and S.T.A. Pickett), pp. 47–68. Ecological Studies 86.
& Wilson (1985) have shown how such conditions may lead
                                                                        Springer-Verlag, New York.
to the coexistence of co-competitive species in a landscape,          Bennett, D.G. & Gade, O. (1979) Geographic perspectives in migration
which are allowed to co-exist only because populations are              research. University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Department
spatially separated from each other at any given moment. At             of Geography Studies in Geography, Number 12.
the other extreme (if species have a graded series of dispersal       Briggs, J.C. (1991) Historical biogeography: the pedagogical problem.
abilities), community composition at each location would be             J. Biogeogr. 18, 3–6.
a nested subset (varying with habitat isolation) of the full          Brown, J. & Kodric-Brown, A. (1977) Turnover rates in insular
species list. Hierarchical nesting of species lists has been much       biogeography: effect of immigration on extinction. Ecology, 58,
discussed in the context of habitat area and area-sensitive             445–449.
                                                                      Burrough, P.A. (1986) Principles of geographical information systems
species (Patterson, 1987); similarly, there may be isolation-
                                                                        for land resources assessment. Oxford University Press, New York.
sensitive species. Presences explained not by local environment
                                                                      Bush, M.B. & Whittaker, R.J. (1991) Cracked: colonization patterns
but by continued dispersal has been termed mass effect (Shmida          and hierarchies. J. Biogeogr. 18, 341–356.
& Wilson, 1985); here we add that absences can be the result,         Cain, S.A. (1944) Foundations of plant geography. Hafner Publishing
not of local environment, but of dispersal limitations and of           Co., New York.
stochastic patterns of original colonizing populations (e.g. the      Christensen, N.L. & Peet, R.K. (1984) Secondary forest succession
imprint of initial refuge competition and migration routes).            on the North Carolina Piedmont. Forest succession: concepts and

                                                                                                         Blackwell Science Ltd 199926867–878
                                                                                                                  Distance decay of similarity 877



  application (ed. by D.C. West, H.H. Shugart and D.B. Botkin),               biogeography. Analytical biogeography (ed. by A.A. Meyers and P.S.
  pp. 230–245. Springer-Verlag, New York.                                     Giller), pp. 3–12. Chapman and Hall, New York.
Cody, M.L. (1985) Towards a theory of continental species diversities.     Mueller-Dombois, D. & Ellenberg, H. (1974) Aims and methods of
  Ecology and evolution of communities (ed. by M.L. Cody and J.M.             vegetation ecology. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
  Diamond), pp. 214–257. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.        Newmark, W.D. (1987) A land-bridge perspective on mammalian
Cogbill, C.V. & White, P.S. (1991) The latitude-elevation relationship        extinctions in western North American parks. Nature, 325, 430–432.
  for Appalachian spruce-fir. Vegetatio, 94, 153–175.                      Nicholson, S., Holway, J.G. & Scott, J.T. (1969) A floristic comparison
Crandall, D.L. (1958) Ground vegetation patterns of the spruce-fir area       of undisturbed spruce-fir forests of the Adirondacks with four other
  of the Great Smoky Mountains National Park. Ecol. Monogr. 28,               regions. Atm. Sci. Res. Center, State U. of N.Y. at Albany. Rept. 92.
  337–360.                                                                 Odland, J. (1988) Spatial autocorrelation. SAGE Publications, Newbury
Cressie, N.A. (1993) Statistics for spatial data. John Wiley & Sons,          Park, California.
  New York.                                                                Ohmann, L.F. & Ream, R.R. (1971) Wilderness ecology: virgin plant
Curtis, J.T. (1959) The vegetation of Wisconsin. University of Wisconsin      communities of the Boundary Waters Canoe Area. North Central
  Press, Madison.                                                             For. Exp. Sta. Rept. NC-63. St. Paul, Minnesota.
Davis, F.W., Stoms, D.M., Estes, J.E., Scepan, J. & Scott, J.M. (1990)     Okubo, A. & Levin, S.A. (1989) A theoretical framework for data
  An information systems approach to the preservation of biological           analysis of wind dispersal of seeds and pollen. Ecology, 70, 329–338.
  diversity. Int. J. Geogr. Info. Syst. 4, 55–78.                          Olea, R.A. (1991) Geostatistical glossary and multilingual dictionary.
Dzwonko, Z. & Loster, S. (1992) Species richness and seed dispersal           Oxford University Press, Oxford, England.
  to secondary woods in southern Poland. J. Biogeogr. 19, 195–204.         Oosting, H.J. & Billings, W.D. (1951) A comparison of virgin spruce-
Faith, D.P., Minchin, P.R. & Belbin, L. (1987) Compositional dis-             fir in the northern and southern Appalachian systems. Ecology, 32,
  similarity as a robust measure of ecological distance. Vegetatio, 69,       84–103.
  57–68.                                                                   Openshaw, S. (1983) The modifiable areal unit problem. Concepts and
Gardner, R.H., O’Neill, ??, Turner, M.G. & Dale, V.H. (1989) Quan-            Techniques in Modern Geography No. 38. Geobooks, Norwich,
  tifying scale-dependent affects of animal movement with simple              England.
  percolation models. Landscape Ecol. 3, 217–227.                          Palmer, M.W. (1988) Fractal geometry: a tool for describing spatial
Gleason, H.A. (1923) The vegetation history of the middle west. Ann.          pattern of plant communities. Vegetatio, 75, 91–102.
  Assoc. Am. Geogr. 12, 39–85.                                             Palmer, M.W. & White, P.S. (1994) Scale dependence and the species-
Grigal, D.F. (1968) The relationship between plants communities and           area relationship. Am. Nat. 144, 717–740.
  soils in northeastern Minnesota. PhD Dissertation, University of         Palmgren, A. (1926) Chance as an element in plant geography. Pro-
  Minnesota, Minneapolis.                                                     ceedings of the International Congress of Plant Sciences, Ithaca, New
Hanski, I. & Gilpin, M. (1991) Metapopulation dynamics: brief history         York (ed. by B.M. Duggar), pp. 591–602. George Banta Publishing
  and conceptual domain. Biol. J. Linn. Soc. 42, 3–16.                        Company, Menasha, Wisconsin.
Hubbell, S.P. (1995) Towards a theory of biodiversity and biogeography     Patterson, B.D. (1987) The principle of nested subsets and its im-
  on continuous landscapes. Preparing for global change: a midwestern         plications for biological conservation. Conserv. Biol. 1, 323–334.
  perspective (ed. by G.R. Carmichael, G.E. Folk and J.L. Schnoor),        Preston, F.W. (1962) The canonical distribution of commonness and
  pp. 173–201. Academic Publishing bv, Amsterdam.                             rarity: parts I and II. Ecology, 43, 185–215; 410–432.
Huffaker, C.B. (1958) Experimental studies on predation: dispersion        Ramseur, G.S. (1960) The vascular flora of the high mountain com-
  factors and predator-prey oscillations. Hilgardia, 27, 343–383.             munities of the southern Appalachians. J. Elisha Mitchell Sci. Soc.
Jackson, D.A. & Somer, K.M. (1989) Are probability estimates from             76, 82–112.
  the permutation model of Mantel’s test stable? Can. J. Zool. 67,         Ripley, B.D. (1988) Statistical inference for spatial processes. Cambridge
  766–769.                                                                    University Press, Cambridge.
Kadmon, R. & Pulliam, H.R. (1993) Island biogeography: effect of           Roughgarden, J., Gaines, S.D. & Pacala, S.W. (1987) Supply side
  geographical isolation on species composition. Ecology, 74, 977–981.        ecology: the role of physical transport processes. Organization of
Lakela, O. (1965) A flora of northeastern Minnesota. University of            communities: past and present (ed. by J.H.R. Gee and P.S. Giller),
  Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.                                               pp. 491–518. Blackwell Scientific, Oxford.
LaRoi, G.H. (1967) Ecological studies in the boreal spruce-fir forests     Saur, J.D. (1988) Plant migration. University of California Press,
  of the North American taiga. I. Analysis of the vascular flora. Ecol.       Berkeley.
  Monogr. 37, 229–253.                                                     Schluter, D. & Ricklefs, R.E. (1993) Species diversity: an introduction
LaRoi, G.H. & Stringer, M.H. (1976) Ecological studies in the boreal          to the problem. Species diversity in ecological communities (ed. by
  spruce-fir forests of the North American taiga. II. Analysis of the         R.E. Ricklefs and D. Schluter), pp. 1–10. University of Chicago Press,
  bryophyte flora. Can. J. Bot. 54, 619–643.                                  Chicago.
MacArthur, R.H. (1972) Geographical ecology. Harper and Row, New           Schoenwald-Cox, C. (1983) Guidelines to management: a beginning
  York.                                                                       attempt. Genetics and conservation (ed. by C. Schoenwald-Cox,
Manly, B.F.J. (1991) Randomization and Monte Carlo methods in                 S.M. Chambers, B. MacBryde and W.L. Thomas), pp. 414–446.
  biology. Chapman and Hall, New York.                                        Benjamin/Cummings Publishing, New York.
McIntosh, R.P. & Hurley, R.T. (1964) The spruce-fir forests of the         Shafer, C. (1990) Nature reserves: Island theory and conservation
  Catskill Mountains. Ecology, 45, 314–326.                                   practice. Smithsonian Institute Press, Washington, DC.
Maycock, P.F. (1961) Botanical studies on Mont St. Hilaire, Rouville       Shmida, A. & Ellner, S. (1984) Coexistence of plant species with similar
  County, Quebec. Can. J. Bot. 39, 1293–1325.                                 niches. Vegetatio, 58, 29–55.
Maycock, P.F. & Curtis, J.T. (1960) The phytosociology of boreal           Shmida, A. & Wilson, M.V. (1985) Biological determinant of species
  conifer-hardwood forests of the Great Lakes region. Ecol. Monogr.           diversity. J. Biogeogr. 12, 1–20.
  30, 1–35.                                                                Siccama, T.G. (1974) Vegetation, soil, and climate on the Green
Meyers, A.A. & Giller, P.S. (1988) Process, pattern, and scale in             Mountains of Vermont. Ecol. Monogr. 44, 325–349.

 Blackwell Science Ltd 199926867–878
878 J. C. Nekola and P. S. White



Simberlof, D.S. & Abele, L.G. (1976) Island biogeography and con-          richness in the southern Appalachian high peaks. J. Ecol. 76, 192–199.
  servation practice. Science, 191, 285–286.                              Whittaker, R.H. (1975) Communities and ecosystems. MacMillan Pub-
Stohlgren, T.J. & Quinn, J.F. (1991) Evaluating the contribution of        lishing, New York.
  northern California National Park areas to regional biodiversity.       Willis, J.C. (1922) Age and area: a study in geographical distribution
  Proceedings of the Symposium on Biodiversity of Northwestern             and origin of species. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
  California, 226–232.
Tilman, D. (1988) Plant strategies and the dynamics and structure of
  plant communities. Princeton University Press, Princeton.                 BIOSKETCHES
Tobler, W.R. (1970) A computer movie simulating urban growth in
  the Detroit region. Econ. Geogr. 46, 234–240.
Vuilleumier, F. (1970) Insular biogeography in continental regions. 1.      Jeffrey C. Nekola received his Ph.D. in Ecology from the
  The northern Andes of South America. Am. Nat. 104, 378–388.               University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 1994. His
Webster, R. & Oliver, M.A. (1990) Statistical methods in soil and land      previous work includes the documentation of the effect of
  resource survey. Oxford University Press, Oxford.                         colonization history on community composition and the
Weddell, B.J. (1991) Distribution and movement of Columbian ground          spatial distribution of rare vascular plant and butterfly
  squirrels (Spermophilus columbianus (Ord)): are habitat patches like      species within and between isolated habitats. He is
  islands? J. Biogeogr. 18, 385–394.                                        currently investigating species-rich land snail communities
Weins, J.A. (1989) Spatial scaling in ecology. Funct. Ecol. 3, 385–397.     at scales ranging from 1 to 10,000 m.
Werner, P.A. & Platt, W.J. (1976) Ecological relationships of co-           Peter S. White is Professor, Department of Biology,
  occurring Goldenrods (Solidago: Compositae). Am. Nat. 110, 959–           University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and Director
  971.
                                                                            of the North Carolina Botanical Garden. His work ranges
White, P.S. (1982) The flora of the Great Smoky Mountains National
                                                                            from studies of biogeography, rare species, exotic species
  Park: an annotated checklist of the vascular plants and a review of
                                                                            invasions, and species richness to vegetation dynamics and
  previous floristic work. USDI, National Park Service, Southeast
                                                                            disturbance.
  Regional Office, Res./Resource Manage. Rept. SER-55.
White, P.S. & Miller, R.I. (1988) Topographic models of vascular plant




                                                                                                              Blackwell Science Ltd 199926867–878
